## Release of 2.4 is delayed

By Geraldine_VdAuwera

<p>Hi all,</p>

<p>As you may know we were planning to release version 2.4 last week. However, we recently decided that because version 2.4 is kind of a big deal (both in terms of feature improvements and the new licensing model) we were going to do a bigger push than usual to make it as stable and bug-free as posible from the get-go. So we've overhauled our internal workflow to promote programming best-practices, and we've been working hard to cover the entire codebase with unit tests. In plain language, this means that from now on, releases will be much more reliable and less prone to weird bugs that make you want to bang your head on your keyboard.</p>

<p>The unfortunate side effect is that this has considerably delayed this release, and for that we sincerely apologize. We realize that some of you are waiting anxiously for 2.4 for bug fixes we promised weeks ago. Sadly we can't simply back-port the fixes to 2.3 because of some infrastructure changes we've made in the meantime. So we can only ask you to bear with us a little longer. We expect to be able to release 2.4 on or a little after 18 Feb.</p>

<p>Today the Broad Institute is closed due to the blizzard warning, so we're all at home in our pajamas (in our respective homes, mind you), studiously coding and squashing bugs. If you're in New England like us, stay safe and warm through the storm. If you're not, please come around and dig us out if you don't hear from us in a couple of days...</p>
