## New job opening in cancer analysis (part-time)

By Geraldine_VdAuwera

<p>We're advertising this job on behalf of our colleagues in the cancer analysis team. See the overview below the fold. If you're interested, please message me (<a href="https://gatkforums.broadinstitute.org/gatk/profile/Geraldine_VdAuwera%29" rel="nofollow">@Geraldine_VdAuwera)</a> or apply on the <a rel="nofollow" href="https://www.broadinstitute.org/careers/job-openings/job-openings-0">Broad's careers page</a> (search for job requisition number 1591).</p>

<h4>Please note that this job requires on-site presence (no remote work) and Broad cannot offer visa sponsorship for this opportunity.</h4>

<hr></hr><h3>Overview</h3>

<p>Part-time opportunity to make a contribution to The Cancer Genome Atlas, a project with global impact in the search for a cure for cancer.  Work with world-class researchers at the Broad Institute to publish large datasets generated by computational algorithms.  Assist with development and maintenance of automated pipelines.</p>

<p>Part-time twice a week, on-site at the Broad Institute.</p>

<h3>Characteristic Duties:</h3>

<ul><li>Assist cancer genome analysts in preparing data submissions to make available to the TCGA research community.</li>
<li>Generate automated data submissions for the TCGA research community.</li>
<li>Identify and address technical issues with automated pipelines.</li>
<li>Extend the functionality of automated pipelines.</li>
<li>Assist with documentation of automated pipelines.</li>
<li>Work with project managers to ensure that requirements and timelines are being met.</li>
<li>Work with engineers on process or design issues</li>
</ul><h3>Requirements:</h3>

<ul><li>Bachelor Degree or currently enrolled in a Bachelor Degree program.  Computer Science, Computational Biology, or Bioinformatics preferred</li>
<li>Proficiency in linux or other unix flavor</li>
<li>Python experience a big plus</li>
<li>Knowledge of web services a plus</li>
<li>Prior involvement or interest in genomics a plus</li>
<li>Excellent communication skills</li>
</ul>